Yesterday we have discussed various examples that comprise FTIR. There is small confusion within this scissoring. Only to this stretching and assymetric stretching belong to stretching vibration  and the rest are bending vibrations. Is this clear?
Now coming to the molecule, we have seen (bunch of stuff)... if you remember that. We have also seen the effect of conjugation on frequency and lone pairs on frequency. I'll put the question now in class assessment. You can solve that

Still assessment 4 and 5 are incomplete. If you complete assessment 5 , then I'll think to put this, otherwise it'll be homework ...  it's up to you. Coming to this ... what happened? done. Mark your attendance
 Yesterday i told you, therell be a quizz competition among yourselves, based on yesterdays lecture. So where we can use? we can identify the organic and inorganic compounds, polymer, polymer blends, additive coatings, pharma, surface... various liquids, various dyes we can take. This IR is very useful in every sector. The thing is that, if you're talking that... that element's lattice parameters you can measure using IR, this is because of the wavelength of IR being smaller than those. We have also seen the alkene, alkyne, various types of bonds... frequency. All these are very important, this may be happen since we are scrolling down our books. So what happen above this point? widely used in each and every sector. Therefore, one should think that in case of biochemistry also, biomolecule. 
 Coming to the biomolecule, these are part of our body and can be analysed using IR. I told you, one cannot identify the stucture using one spectroscopy, you need to couple them. I will also now show you some medicinal plants. This is a medicinal plant -name-. We extract the active ingredient. Similarly this one, anticancerous drug. Various medicinal values. One can refer this journal, take a snapshot and circulate among your colleagues. Yeah, so, as I said. I just have to show you the difference between aliphatic and aromatic again Just observing the difference in the spectra, in the fingerprint region, you can see some shear stretching there and C-C single bond vibration there. Why aromatic compound higher frequency? or lower? If you have aromatic structure, these vibration are fixed, whereas alkane, you wont see such kind of bands in this region. You wont find the examples in david harvey and such books. The examples are taken from various researchers and papers. This is heptane, how many carbon? 7, this is toluene, how many carbon? 7. Same carbon numbers but different environment. One is saturated, the other is unsaturated. So difference in hybridisation. SP2 is more electronegative character and SP3 is less, so high energy needed to vibrate the bond. So, one can see that you observe the alkane, below 3000/cm. But if you talk about alkene or toluene, is ... So my second question, based on this concept, what is the effect on styrene, will frequency increase or decrease? Why frequency decrease? because bond length increase. Are you getting this aliphatic and aromatic concept? -sir explains it again- small bond = big frequency
 Maximum number of bond, stronger the bond. Directly proportional (on energy and frequency). 
 If you're talking about energy, in this case, one can measure the frequency in terms of wavenumber. In case of IR, we express frequency in terms of wavenumber. Ok very good. Uhh yeah, someone enjoy my teaching, very good. -sir draws an solution to watve's question-
 Just for sake of understanding, consider carbon carbon single bond. There are two derivatives (>?)... so when you have iodine, when you think about carbon carbon single bond for the same molecule =, what will happen? it will donate the electron. Yesterday we spoke about the +I effect. The more the effect, the larger the size, the smaller the size. So this bond length is comparable to the size of fluorine. You can take carbon carbon single bond or carbon carbon single bond, here the bond length is lower compared to carbon carbon single bond. Clear? If smaller, more energy is needed to stretch or bend. Thus more frequency is required. Similarly in case of alkyne, even worse. So the S orbital or that cabron atom, very close to the nucleus, therefore difficult to excite electron to higher energy levels. Clear? Based on this we have a small, I could say, yes. Can you differentiate the structure? Here, most of the more than 3000 or more than 3000. Actually, I had given the animation here, not working for this slide. In exam, you will get the frequency and guess the structure. Tentatively we'll take the example, tentatively. Nahi samjha? If possible, if you write the whole structure of the molecule, what about this? this corresponds to what? what stretching or bending? what about this? this is a C-H, stretching. Then, wait I'll just remove that, I'm not sure why that happened, I have tried it. Yeah. Now it's visible? yeah, please pay your attention here - carbon oxygen stretching here, single bond. Yeah, one can see that. Remember that if you take the alcohol, you can get the peak, a band, from 3400 to 3622 cm-1, in case of OH stretching vibrations. In case of carboxylic acid, there are two functional groups attatched. We have seen that yesterday, CO and OH. So you OH and C=0 vibrations are mixing and you'll get the sharp peaks together. So here, you can see that, this is the hydrocarbon, you can see the peaks for vibrations for the C-H and C-C bond. Again the same, I'll draw this, remove this. Yeah, yes. So we can see that here, we can get C-H vibrations here. So as I said, for carboxylic acid, we can get the vibrations together. So this is for simple... we have seen carbonyl group right? so carbonyl group also present in aldehyde, ketone, amide, what else? various molecules such as the double bond and we can see the carbon sulfur double bond and what else? remember that if you're talking about carbon double bond frequency, it is in this range, starting from 1600 to 1800. That frequency, in case of aldehyde shows higher frequency to ketone due to electronegative effect. But if you take ester or carboxylic acid, it has a lower frequency, remember this carbon is very hungry of electron, so that is why you can see that... Ha, boliye (dev says something) Here there is no inverval for hydrogen bonding. In the next slide we have an interval for hydrogen bonding. Here you can see that there is no carbon frequency here. It's a simple alcohol. Hope you have understood this part. 
 So can you tell me which vibrations require higher frequency? stretching ... clear about this?
 What are the types of vibrations we have seen which are responsible for the IR band?
 Your good name? Munish, good. SO, we are talking about IR frequency, the two important vibrations are stretching and bending. If you're talking about stretching, there are two types of stretching and for bending, there are 4 types of bending... RIght? So this is the last slide of FTIR, if you havent understood any concept, please let me know. These are the references for your better understanding. MOstly the IR soectroscopy is used for qualitative analysis. Yeah, yeah - good question. Yeah, why stretching require higher energy? can anyone explain? I have already explained. It's ok you asked a question, I'll give an answer. Bending is very easy, stretching is harder. Oxygen lone pair gets donated. This one is the minus and that one is the plus. Clear? Clear? Because of resonance, bond length is increased. Kulkarni, if you have any queries, I'll be happy to answer. The last subtopics of this theory, of this, not course. So the last topic is electrochemistry or a=electroanalytics. We discussed the examples... can you name that? firefly, jellyfish, 
 Why we observe the fluoroscence? WHy any species show that fluoroscence? any answer? higher state to lower. Are you sure, that when the electron come from the state to ground state, they give light? I will explain in the coming slides, but what are your? and in the night  it shows the fluoroscence. Toh maine clarify kiya tha voh. 
 How many of you are using the cycle? you are using that jacket or that helmet, it luminesces 
First the excitation and emission. Hogaya aapka discussion? if you allow me, I'll speak. If you speak of photolumiescence, its because of electron from higher state to lower state. What absorption happens, it absorbs energy from ground state to higher state. It emit the energy as a lumiscent photon. Not all relaxation shows luminescence or fluoroscence. Got the point? No? it emits the radiance as photon. If every molecule shows fluoroscence, we are all fluoroscent. If you go in sunlight, again more energy, very intense high energy photon striking on our body. Thats why we feel very hot, right? This is the absorption spectra and this is the fluoroscence spectra. This is absorbed at higher wavelength, lower energy. This is for the absorption and this is for the emission. So, first we'll discuss about the luminescence. So, am I audible? If you;re talking about luminescence, it's resulting from the excitation of the electron. But the excitation is not because of heating. Here relaxation is due to the cold body, normal temperature. It could be caused by the... because of all this phenomena, when it comes down, it releases energy as fluoroscence. When it comes down, we can see the fluoroscence